Linux - Scripting - Module - closes #552 (#598)
bob-crutchley/courseware: topics/linux/modules/scripting/README.md

# Scripting in Linux

<!--TOC_START-->
## Contents
- [Overview](#overview)
- [Tutorial](#tutorial)
	- [Scripting Logic](#scripting-logic)
- [Exercises](#exercises)

<!--TOC_END-->
## Overview
Simply put a script is a file that we can execute. 
The file would contain text in the form of commands and execute the commands one after another.

We need to remember to make the command **executable**.

## Tutorial

We create a script file with the file extension `.sh`

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Execute the following command to create a script file called `example.sh`

```

```bash
touch example.sh
```
You can use `#` for comments.
```bash
whoami
# Everything after the hash will be ignored
ls
```

> We need to specify where we want the file to be executed, we do this at the top of the file with this line to run the file as a bash script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to specify where we want the file to be executed, we do this at the top of the file with this line to run the file as a bash script. This line is also knows as `shebang`.
```

```bash
#! /bin/bash
```

> Then we add the commands we want the script to execute to the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we add the commands we want the script to execute below the shebang line. In the example below the first command `whoami` will print out the username of the current session, and the second command will list all the files within the directory.
```

```bash
#! /bin/bash

whoami
ls
```

> We then exit the file and make it executable with this command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We then save and exit the file. In order for the script to be executable you need to add the executable permission, the command below is specifically for this purpose.
```

```bash
chmod +x example.sh
```
Then we can run the file with this command.
```bash
./example.sh
```
Or we can add the directory that the file resides in to the PATH, to make it exectuable from anywhere.
```bash
export PATH=$(pwd):$PATH
```

> ### Scripting Logic

Reviewer: Adding variables would be good

Author: I will add a section on variables

Author: Variables are already covered in the files and directories module, should I still add it in?

Reviewer: in this domain it's a variable in bash rather than a system variable, so it would help having it here

fi
rm temp.txt
```
</details>

**Exercise 4**
Write a script that takes a file as user input and returns whether the file exists and if so, the full path to that file.

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>

```bash
#! /bin/bash
echo "What file do you want to find?"
read filename
where=$(pwd)
who=$(whoami)
cd /home/${who}
value=$(find "$(cd ..; pwd)" -name ${filename} | head -n 1)

if [ ${value} ] 
then
	echo "Exists ${value}"
elif [ -d ${value} ]
then
	echo "Exists ${value}"
else
	echo "Does not exist"
fi
```
</details>

**Exercise 5**
Write a script that does the following:
```text
- Takes a filename and title as user input
- Creates (if it doesn't exist) a directory named the current month and year
- Creates a markdown file inside that directory with the users filename and the date on the end. 
- While also entering the title and date at the top of the file.
- Stretch Goal: Try and get the script to take you to that directory and stay there.
```

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>

```bash
#! /bin/bash

echo "Name of file?"
read name
echo "Title?"
read title
cd ~
if [ -d "$(date "+%B-%Y")" ]; then
	cd $(date "+%B-%Y")
else
	mkdir $(date "+%B-%Y")
	cd $(date "+%B-%Y")
fi

> touch ${name}$(date "+%d").md

Author: I have added clarification in the explaination

echo "## ${title} Date: $(date "+%D")" >> ${name}$(date "+%d").md
vim ${name}$(date "+%d").md
```
</details>

> **Exercise 6**

Reviewer: The solution needs to be more thorough, you need to specify that a gcloud account is needed, installing gcloud sdk and then logging in, executing the script, need to select a project, then the region, and at that point I gave up as it seems too much hassle to finish solving this

Author: Deleted
